In Berlin, Professor Roland Hetzer at the German Heart Institute
corrects a ventricular septal defect in a ten-month-old girl.
In Yena, Professor Johannes Schela at Friedrich Schiller University Clinic
performs a liver resection.
In London, Peter Earnshaw, a fellow of the Royal College
who practices at guys in St. Thomas hospitals,
performs a total knee replacement.
Challenging surgeries, but they share an added dimension.
In each of these cases, the team had committed itself
to operating without allogeneic blood transfusion.
Today in 150 countries, more than 100,000 physicians
have made a similar commitment to bloodless medicine and surgery
because they believe transfusion alternative strategies
are simple, safe, effective.
Many view the pioneering bloodless major cardiovascular
surgery of Dr. Denton Cooley in the 1950s as the beginning.
He cooperated with patients who are Jehovah's Witnesses
and who, while seeking quality medical and surgical treatment,
do not accept allogeneic blood transfusion,
they observe the biblical injunction abstain from blood.
In 1977, Cooley's team published a report on their 20 years of experience
with a consecutive series of 542 bloodless cardiovascular surgeries.
The report noted an acceptably low risk.
Professor Richard Spence, a pioneer in transfusion alternative strategies.
The lessons we learned in the early stages of bloodless medicine
and surgery with the Jehovah's Witness clearly translated
over all of the rest of our patients.
So the field now really of blood conservation
includes the use of multiple alternatives
and a planned way to avoid the need to transfuse a patient
with someone else's blood.
We have operated on newborns, we have operated on people in their 90s,
and we use these same techniques and approaches.
Professor Albert Hu, speaking of efforts in the general patient population.
In the era when the risks of blood transfusion were not realized as they are today,
15% of all women in such a group of at-risk patients received blood.
Today, this figure is far below 1%,
even though we are a center for complicated cases.
We've now reduced our transfusion rate
for new replacements, new revision replacements.
I think of the order of 5 to 8%.
Ideally, we'd like to get it down to zero.
Professor Hetzer points to one reason for such efforts.
Today, at least 80% of the patients
would strongly favor not to have blood transfusions.
And for legal and ethical reasons,
today attention is increasingly being given
to inspecting the wishes of the patient.
Experts also cite their desire to avoid medical risks
related to transfusing allergenic blood.
Any unit that is donated into the blood bank,
whether it's an allergenic unit or a PAD unit,
there's always the risk of administrative error
and an ABO mismatch and a fatal hemolytic transfusion reaction.
Side effects include not only the transmission of viral diseases
that everybody talks about like HIV or hepatitis B or C,
but also new viruses that are prevalent in the donor population.
Also, parasitic diseases are more and more transmitted
via blood transfusions.
The public health impact of transfusion in a modulation
is very difficult to estimate.
And we've estimated that approximately in the United States,
we can expect that 10 to 50,000 patients a year
may be dying from transfusion in a modulation related causes.
Will existing viruses mutate and produce disease?
There's no reason to believe that they want.
Many see these risks and the resulting costs,
but feel that they have no alternatives to allergenic blood.
However, even the benefits of present policies on the use of allergenic blood
come under question in view of a groundbreaking study
by Dr. Paul A. Bear of Canada.
It compared a liberal transfusion policy with a restrictive one
in critically ill ICU patients.
The results were surprising, particularly the mortality rates.
I talk about the A. Bear paper
where they showed it more than 800 patients
that less transfusion results in an improved outcome.
Other evidence showing the need to review policies on the use of blood
comes from two earlier studies.
Consider first the Sanguis study published in 1994.
Part of a concerted action of the European Commission's
Medical Research Program, the study analyzed transfusion rates
in major health care centers across Europe.
Forty-three teaching hospitals were prospectively studied
as to their routine transfusion rates
for six common standardized operations.
The Sanguis study revealed that different institutions routinely
transfused drastically different percentages of patients
for the same surgeries, varying from 0% at some institutions
to 96% at others on coronary artery bypass graft
and from 0% to 100% on total hip replacement.
The main lesson is the variability of a transfusion practice
from one center to another for the same specific operation.
In 1998, in Belgium, a follow-up study was published.
So all types of hospitals were included in the Belgium Biomed Transfusion study
for surgery.
And we found exactly the same range of variability.
So we are left with the conclusion that variability implies
that a lot of these blood transfusion components
are being given unnecessarily.
However, there is a positive note regarding two Belgian hospitals
that participated in both studies.
After the Sanguis study, they changed their transfusion policy.
They had somehow managed to reduce their blood consumption
for major surgery, like collectomephal cancer,
by a factor of five, at least.
The hospitals they was shorter, so we have no evidence
of increased morbidity, nor mortality.
In the light of what has been learned in the last few years,
Professor Philippe Funder-Linden summarizes what many experts have concluded.
In view of the potential for a better patient care
and reduced ill-care cost, blood conservation is not an option.
It's a must.
But what is the foundation for an effective transfusion alternative program?
Experts agree that it is a team approach.
It truly has to be a cooperative effort, a team effort to the approach.
And it has to be tailored to the patient's condition,
as well as the operative procedures.
Some techniques are appropriate for some procedures and some surgeons,
and not for others.
The various transfusion alternative techniques used by successful teams
can be placed under three basic principles or pillars.
Pre-operative planning involves to realize that a patient has not enough
anogenous red blood cells for planned operation.
And this depends not only on the hematocrit,
but also on the estimated blood volume of a given patient,
the estimated blood loss that the planned operation is associated with,
and also the transfusion threshold that can be considered reasonable or tolerable
in this individual patient.
The first pillar can be defined as appropriate tolerance of anemia.
This involves reconsidering the standard policy on anemia treatment.
Some still use a transfusion trigger of a hematocrit of 30%,
or a hemoglobin level of 10 grams per deciliter for all patients.
Thresholds that date back to an article by Adams and Lundy published in 1942.
I am really convinced that there is no place for the magic 10 grams.
Our experience with Jehovah's Witness has shown that, first of all,
we don't need the hemoglobin levels we assumed were essential previously.
But there should be no harder fast rule or there should be no trigger.
You can anesthetize patients with some procedures depending upon the patient.
There's always two or three grams if necessary.
All experienced physicians stress the importance of maintaining normal valemia
via simple volume replacement.
With adequate volume, oxygen consumption is maintained over a wide range of hemoglobin levels.
According to Professor Fundalinden, the two main mechanisms responsible
for the maintenance of adequate tissue oxygenation are an increase in cardiac output.
And an increase in tissue oxygen extraction.
In the range of hematocrit values illustrated, the amount of oxygen extracted
from the red blood cells of a non-anemic person is practically the same as that
taken up from fewer red blood cells under acute normal valemic anemia.
The first mechanism results from the decreased blood viscosity and sympathetic stimulation.
The second mechanism results from a redistribution of blood flow to areas of high metabolic demand
and from improved micro-circulation.
I am really convinced that a better knowledge of the mechanism
allowing the maintenance of adequate tissue oxygenation
during acute normal valemic anemia could decrease the risk of blood transfusion.
What does experience with this principle alone reveal?
I halved our transfusion rate by simply saying,
could we lower our triggers from 10 to 8?
And just taking a little more control over the decision.
That was very easy. That cost nothing.
We do know that we can allow patients to collaborate
to relatively low hemoglobin levels without blood transfusions.
Obviously, it is important to plan ahead.
Especially if the patient for religious or other reasons refuses allogeneic blood.
Preoperative planning requires a careful clinical assessment of the bleeding risks
and a thorough laboratory screening, including standard hematological parameters.
Based on the patient's condition, this may include other tests,
such as a coagulation profile and tests for conditions contributing to anemia.
Next, there is the need to calculate the safety zone
where tolerable red blood cell loss for a particular patient
throughout perioperative care.
Here is how Professor Ernst Shaw explains his approach using the example of joint replacement.
All you need is height and weight, male or female, initially hemoglobin, hematocrit.
And you can immediately work out what their blood volume is.
Next, either using your personal data
and anybody who's doing more than a few joint replacements
should be able to go back and look what their typical loss is.
So you want to know what loss there will be for that particular procedure.
The only other thing you need to know is how much can you tolerate?
In other words, how low can you let this patient go?
What if the expected RBC loss is greater than the tolerable?
You can increase the blood loss that is tolerated by the patient
by simply lowering the threshold of transfusion trigger
or you can increase the allowable blood loss by increasing the initial hematocrit of the patient
and therefore have the patient start or go into the operation with a higher mass of red blood cells.
Several of these proactive techniques can be grouped under the second pillar, optimizing RBC mass.
We can expand the circulating red blood cell mass of the patients before the operation.
And this can be achieved with cheap hematinics like iron, polycacid, vitamin B12.
For selected cases, recombinant erythropoietin or EPO combined with iron therapy can be used to treat anemia
or to raise the pre-surgical hematocrit to within a range of 45 to 50%.
EPO is normally started 10 to 21 days prior to surgery.
EPO illustrated by small particles increases red cell production by affecting the survival, differentiation,
and maturation of erythroid cells in the bone marrow.
In the late erythroblastic stage, the nuclei are expelled.
Finally, the erythrocytes are pushed into the bloodstream.
Note the acceleration of red cell production with EPO.
Besides the increase in RBC mass, under EPO treatment, usually one week is gained.
Note the comparatively higher hematocrit rise under EPO therapy according to one study.
And utilizing erythropoietin, we can increase the circulating hemoglobin by one bram decidator for each week of treatment.
For commenting human erythropoietin therapy is a tool that has also been shown to be effective as a blood conservation strategy.
It's been shown particularly in orthopedic procedures in patients who are anemic.
And by that I mean whose initial hemoglobin is less than 13 or hematocrit is less than 39%.
Now we use erythropoietin in very specific cases.
Like for instance, also the children of Chihuahua's witnesses, where we start to administer this medication four to six weeks before the operation.
It's given twice a week with a dosage of 400 units per kilogram.
If you combine the two principles that is increasing the preoperative hematocrit and decreasing the threshold for allogeneic blood transfusion,
then you can allow an even larger blood loss to occur without the need for allogeneic blood transfusion.
Now this allowable blood loss can be further reduced certainly by surgical techniques or by anesthesiological techniques.
Thus even such complex procedures as spinal surgery and redo open heart surgery are routinely performed with an even wider safety zone, afforded by the third pillar of a transfusion alternative protocol.
Either by minimizing the bleeding or by recovering shed blood.
Let's consider several important intraoperative techniques.
Patient positioning is a simple cost-effective technique to reduce bleeding.
Local venous pressure changes depending on the field's position relative to the heart and lower pressure directly correlates with blood saved.
It's important to position the patient properly due to an orthopedic surgery.
In my experience, it makes a big difference in spinal surgery.
With pressure on the abdomen and thus on the paravertebral veins, blood loss increases.
With proper support, avoiding abdominal compression, blood loss decreases.
Another option to decrease venous pressure in some surgeries is to use regional instead of general anesthesia.
As shown here, prior to a cesarean section, a further technique is the maintenance of normal thermia, especially during long operations.
So if a patient is cool or cold by one or two degrees temperature, you are seeing a loss in ability of platelets and coagulation factors to work.
So it's essential that we keep the patient's normal thermic.
Normal thermia is extremely important.
Therefore, our operating theatre temperatures are 27 degrees in those major procedures.
Which sometimes is hard for the surgeons, even for the anesthesiologists, but it's very good for the patient.
More directly, the patient's body can be warmed with a thermal suit or blankets.
There are even simple machines to warm fluids before infusion.
Next, hemodolution.
The principles of hemodolution in terms of reduction of blood loss are really quite simple.
If blood is removed from the patient immediately prior to or immediately after induction of anesthesia and replaced with a cellular fluids,
then when the patient bleeds interoperatively, the red cell loss is less.
For every 100 ml of whole blood lost by the patient, in the case of a patient with a hematocard of 27%,
they're going to lose 27 ml of RBCs rather than the 45 ml of RBCs they would have lost had we started the case at a hematocard of 45%.
Additionally, the hemodolution procedure is acceptable to a number of Jehovah's Witnesses.
Hemodolution is certainly cost-effective, but not only that, it is also beneficial for the patient as it improves blood rheology as has been shown by many studies.
Another transfusion alternative technique for selected surgeries is induced hypotension to lower mean arterial pressure intraoperatively.
Usually, a drug is used to decrease systemic vascular resistance. This typically prevents up to 50% of blood loss.
Anesthesiologists urge caution when combining hypotension with hemodolution because hypotension can interfere with the normal redistribution of blood flow.
A crucial factor that requires skill and patience is meticulous surgical hemostasis and technique.
I teach the residents to just gently score the scan and open it and then use the calorie to get all the blood vessels.
The basic technique for a surgeon to control bleeding is to ligate the vessels.
That's true for all the vessels, let's say, down to one millimeter in diameter.
If there's some bleeding persisting, there are calculation techniques, best of which is at the moment argon beam calculations.
We use it routinely in liver transplantation.
Hemostatic agents can also assist.
There is two types of agents, general agents that could be administered intravenously, such as trannix amicacid or aprotinin.
And the surgeons have also the possibility to use topical glues in order to better control the bleeding in the surgical field.
Here a fibrin gloopad is directly applied to the dissected surface of a liver.
This product containing a blood fraction is accepted by a number of Jehovah's Witnesses and others.
The final intraoperative transfusion alternative is called cell salvage.
If intraoperative bleeding becomes heavy, a cell salvage machine, often kept on standby, is able to recover the shed blood.
As the blood flows through the device, some machines simply filter out any debris, while other types include the additional step of washing the red cells as they circulate.
A cell salvage machine can save up to 50% of the blood that would otherwise be lost.
Such devices are acceptable to a number of patients who are Jehovah's Witnesses.
Cell salvage is a very important technique because when you use cell salvage, the blood lost by the surgeon is not lost for the patient.
Cell salvage is usually used when you expect the blood loss in the range of one liter and more, for an adult patient.
Periopality blood salvage is a very useful technique for blood conservation, because it's very easy to organize in the majority of operations.
Cardiovascular, orthopaedic, gynecological and so on, so it can be widely applied in surgery.
Some machines allow cell salvage on a small child, expanding the horizons of the technique.
Often, simple cell salvage machines are also very valuable in the post-operative setting.
What we tend to do, particularly for knees, where it's often done with a tourniquet and there is no intraoperative loss, we salvage it immediately afterwards.
It's very simple and very useful and moderately cheap, just the stuff that comes out, filter it and give it back.
And we've been doing that here now for about four years and we're very pleased with the success rate.
Another important consideration for minimizing blood loss is the use of micro-sampling for necessary tests.
Micro-sampling is critical in both pre-operative and post-operative care of infants and anemic adults.
Professor Mikhail Obladen addresses the challenge presented by premature infants.
It helps teaching the doctor the amount of blood really required and not to take more.
And formally, it was if in doubt, take half a millilitre more.
And we don't speak about milliliters anymore, we speak about micro-liters.
The whole process of sampling is documented in the baby's chart so that everyone is aware about the cumulative amount of blood withdrawn.
Professor Ernest Moore on micro-sampling adults.
If you add up the blood samples, it's remarkable how much is taken off in a week of the ICU care.
So certainly using microtubule type of analysis, we can markedly reduce the number of CCs of blood loss today for sampling.
Physicians who advocate transfusion alternative strategies are often asked if these same strategies are applicable to trauma
or emergency care.
When you're looking at principles and patients who have trauma or massive blood, unanticipated blood loss,
is first and foremost, act quickly.
The cessation of bleeding with a surgically or another means must be the first principle.
The second one is that one can apply these modalities such as cell salvage on the specific circumstances
and recoup the patient's own blood.
The anesthesiological concept are to tolerate a certain degree of relatively low blood pressure
and to be a little restrictive in infusing enormous amounts of volume, particularly before a surgical source control has been achieved,
that means before the surgical bleeding have been identified and stopped.
Perhaps one of the, I think, greatest advances in conserving blood and trauma has been the concept of so-called damage control surgery.
That is, once we open the patient's abdomen or chest and note that the patient is unable to coagulate that we address the major bleeding vessels,
then control the surface with pads and close the patient temporarily, allowing them to be taken to the intensive care unit
where their resuscitation is continued and efforts to reverse those adverse effects on coagulation like hypothermia are specifically addressed.
Introma management remorning is very important because during advanced hypothermia, blood coagulation doesn't function properly and therefore the blood loss is larger.
Professor Moore reviews additional effective steps.
As you move into the intensive care unit in the more complex problems, then I think the use of earth report becomes even more compelling in the trauma patient.
In Jehovah's Witness patient, we have no delay in providing both earth report and iron immediately after they arrive in the hospital.
We may, in fact, do preemptive interventional radiologic evaluation of solid organs and embolize arteries that are not currently bleeding actively but are at risk for bleeding later.
This brief overview of strategies is properly viewed as a comprehensive concept.
To say there's a list of transfusion alternatives is correct but that really does not get to the heart of the issue and that is that we must use those alternatives in multiple combinations focused on the patient.
Not everyone needs every strategy, the earth report and being a very good example of that.
Dr. Todd Rosengaard has published two major studies on multi-modality blood conservation in coronary artery bypass operations performed without allergenic transfusion.
When we looked at a series of 50 Jehovah's Witness patients and 100 patients in the general population, we found a short olympus day and a lower cost using our blood conservation strategy.
Medicine gives every indication of rapid advancement in this new millennium in the meantime.
I think all physicians should be interested in blood conservation strategies because there is substantial evidence that reductions in morbidity and mortality and reductions in cost can come with these strategies.
The less blood that is transfused in a given surgical program could be used as an index of the quality of that program.
I think that the safest transfusion is the transfusion never given.
And blood conservation is a very simple method which makes things rather smooth, less expensive and with a better outlook for the patient.
I think there are some very simple, very cheap things you can do to help the majority of people and this could be done in the smallest of hospitals.
Transfusion alternatives are safe. This is not just something I use for the Jehovah's Witness patient for example.
I use this for every patient who comes to me. Transfusion alternatives clearly are good medical practice, sound medical practice, safe practice for our patients.